Notes #8

Reconstruction:
First Round: Presidential Reconstruction: 1863-1866
Second Round: Congressional Reconstruction: 1866-1872
Third Round: Redeemers or Southern Reconstruction: 1872-1877

Lincoln's 10% Plan: Presidential pardon to Southerners who took an oath of allegiance to the U.S. 10% of voters must take the oath and eliminate slavery in a state to be readmitted to the union
Radical Republicans thought Lincoln was being too soft and that the South should be punished; wanted soldiers across the South
Wade-Davis Bill: Never passed, but would have requried 50% of voters to take a loyalty oath in contrast to Lincoln's 10%. Also wanted only non-confederates to be able to vote for a new state-constitution. Enacted safeguards for freedmans' liberties. Lincoln pocket vetoed it, however (Would have otherwise passed since an overwhelming majority of republicans in office)
Pocket Veto: Refuse to sign a bill before congress adjourns
Freedmans' Bureau (1865): Early wellfare system that helped ex-slaves and poor whites with the transition out of war. Chief accomplishment is education

13th Amendment: Abolished slavery and indentured servitude, completing the work of the Emancipation Proclamation
Lincoln assassinated, next president is Johnson (Lincoln's former VP)
10%+ Plan: Proposed by Johnson, same as Lincoln's except disallowed high ranking confederate officials and wealthy property owners from taking the oath (though they could get individual pardons potentially). Also state constitutions required minimum conditions repudiating slavery (and rights to freed slaves), secession, debts, and needed to ratify the 13th amendment
8 months after Johnson takes office all confederate states qualify and rejoin the Union
Johnson pardoned planter aristocrats and brought them back to political power  to control state governments, outraging republicans.
The South were defiant via the Black Codes
Black Codes: Prohibited African Americans from renting land or borrowing money to buy land, putting them into a for of semi-bondage. African Americans also could not testify in court against whites.



Notes #9:

Johnson vetoes the Freedmen Bureau Bill and the Civil Rights Bill, but both get the veto overrided and are put into effect
Civil Rights Act of 1866: All African Americans are U.S. Citizens; Black Codes are nullified
In 1866, Republicans will win an overwhelming majority even though Johnson went around the nation to attack repulicans

14th Amendment:  All persons born or naturalized in the U.S. are citizens, invalidated Dredd Scott decision, and provided "equal protection of the laws" for all citizens
Radical Republicans set out to remake the south in the image of the north, requiring new state constiutions with A.A. suffrage and ratification of both the 13th and 14th amendments. Also made it so Confederates couldn't vote
Reconstruction Acts of 1867: Many acts, including
* Military Reconstruction Act: Restart reconstruction, divide the 11 "unreconstructed" states into 5 military districts
* Command of the Army Act: President must issue all reconstruction orders through the commander of the military
* Tenure of Office Act: The President cannot remove any (cabinet) officials without Senate's consent
Johnson removed Stanton from 1868, challenging Tenure of Office, causing him to get impeached


Notes #10:

Waving the Bloody Shirt: A phrase that mocked opposing politicians who made emotional calls to avenge the blood of soldiers who died in the Civil War
Election of 1868: Ulysses S. Grant is elected

15th Amendment: The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied due to their race, color, or previous condition of servitude. Gave suffrage to A.A. but did not assure any rights to women.
There was outrage that the 15th amendment did not address women's suffrage, causing Stanton and Anthony to speak out against the amendment. Women's rights movement is split: one side believes that A.A. suffrage is more important than women's suffrage.
Scalawags: White southern republicans (small farmers) that opposed secession
Carpetbaggers: Northern republicans who moved to the south to help reconstruction
Freedman began to hold political office across the South
Ku Klux Klan: Wanted to maintain white supremacy, the "muscle" of the democratic party. Intimidated A.A. and white reforms, with the "Invisible Empire" burning A.A. owned buildings and murdering A.A. to keep them frm voting. The terror worked by helping Democrats defeat republicans.
Enforcement Act / Ku Klux Klan Act (1870): Banned the use of terror, force, or bribery to prevent people from voing. Banned the KKK and strengthened the militarity. Within a year the KKK was wiped out.
Grant presidd over an era of unprecedented growth and corruption.
(Credit Mobilier Scandal, Whiskey Ring, The "Indian Ring") ?
Sharecropping: Labor system where freedmen instead of working for wages recieved a share of the crop
Tenant Farming: A.A. rented land from landowners to grow whatever they wanted to earn an income
Both sharecropping and tenant farming resulted in situation similar to slavery because of debts
Grant wins re-election
Panic of 1873: Hard vs. soft money
CIvil Rights Act of 1875: Guaranteed equal accommodations in public places, prohibited courts from excluding A.A. from juries.
Effects of Reconstruction:
* Success: Rebuilt union and repaired the south, Freeden's Bureau helped A.A. gain housing, jobs, and education. South gets public school.
* Failures: Most blacks stayed poor, no property, opportunity, and political power. Blacks lost the vote,rRacism didn't stop, and southerners hated Federal government.

